Uh, we're looking forward to our session
with you this afternoon, as you'll be aware,
it's in relation, the petition, um,
from Marcelo Rodriguez Ferra in terms
of animal import products new to New Zealand
and animal welfare standards.
Uh, so we've previously heard from the submitter
and we wanted to hear that in relation to your views on
that submission and the petition more broadly.
Uh, we've got 15 minutes set down for that,
so we'd appreciate some time for questions at the end of
that, but we'll hand over to you
for introductory comments. Thank you.
Thank you, chair. So shall we introduce ourselves?
My name's Brian Wilson. I'm, uh, with the Trade Policy
and negotiations, um, division of mfa,
My colleague, uh, And I'm Caroline Ralph, uh, head
of the Trade Law Unit. Infa.
Excellent. Thank you. So I thought I'd just
make a few brief comments.
Yes. Um, by way of introductions,
So sorry, just to confirm, we
are live streaming this as well.
Yep. Thank you. Thank
You. Uh,
so just a bit of context.
In terms of New Zealand's, uh, trade figures
for animal products to the end
of June this year we imported New Zealand 2.6 billion worth
of animal products.
That's about 3% of our total goods, uh, imports.
The biggest item of that was pet food at 500 million. Hmm.
In terms of exports, we exported New Zealand 40 billion, uh,
of these products and that they accounted for 53%
of New Zealand's total goods exports.
So, as I said, in terms of leaving time for questions,
I won't rehearse all the points we made in our, um,
in res our response to the petition.
But one key point in our response was our, our assessment
that adopting the approach recommended in the petition
could involve an element of risk to that $40 billion worth
of New Zealand animal product exports.
Now, we acknowledge that the risk involved may not be great,
but neither can it be discounted.
So it seems to us that one factor to take into account
and considering the petition is the degree
to which there would be comfort in running at least an
element of risk that at least some portion of that 53%
of New Zealand's total, uh,
goods exports could potentially be be impacted.
Uh, the nature of any possible negative response, uh,
if we did adopt the approach from our export markets,
is difficult to predict.
It might not come strictly in the area of animal welfare
could come in the form of one of the various forms
of non tariff barriers,
which New Zealand agricultural
exports face around the world.
And also it might not take the form
of direct retaliation as such.
New Zealand has a good story to talk
to tell about animal welfare standards,
but any response that there was from any
of our trade partners would at the least be likely
to involve greater scrutiny by them
of our own animal welfare standards.
So our infant approach
to this issue is based on the assessment
that animal welfare considerations need
to be seen in the context of each country's specific
domestic circumstances.
And that means it's not always appropriate
to apply domestic animal welfare requirements
on imported animal products.
The imposition of the same
or more rigorous animal welfare requirements on imported
animal products than those which are applied to New Zealand
produced animal products, could make it more difficult
for us to make our pace in circumstances where some
of our export markets might impose what we would consider
to be unwarranted requirements of one sort
or another on New Zealand's animal product exports to them.
So I'll leave it there. Have take questions.
Alright, Thank you very much, Brian. Appreciate that.
Uh, first question from Steve Abel. Yeah,
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you for being here.
Thank you for your substantive response to, um, I'm,
I wanted to really zero in on the extent of the risk.
I think you've made it pretty clear with your response
that the essential principle
of us making a public morals case
for there being an expectation among the New Zealand public.
And, uh, MPI find a found a
95%, uh, feeling among New Zealanders
for high animal welfare standards.
We have in response to that created, um, uh, a code around
pigs, for example, of al stalls.
And that public morals case is a credible defense in the WTO
for a symposium.
A similar expectation on imported or products, for example,
and you don't seem to contest any of that.
Um, your, and,
but we have to apply the same standard
to every single thing, domestic production
and overseas production.
Your concern is for an oblique, um,
use of our stance, for example, on pork.
Say we were to implement that on another sector
of animal production where somebody,
the example we get given might say,
you don't put your cows in sheds over winter and
therefore we're gonna have a crack at you.
That, is that what you are talking about as the,
as you said, not a great risk, but the potential risk?
Is that what you're concerned about?
That would be one element of potential risk, yes.
Yeah. If a country were to do that, they would've
to apply the same standard for it to be within wt a rules
to every other country in the world from which they're
importing and to their
local producers. That's correct, isn't it?
In theory that's correct.
But no, unfortunately in the, as we see in the world, it,
things don't necessarily go according to the rules.
Yeah. So people sort of, um, do put in place
what you would call non tariff barriers
because they're just trying to find a way to stop
importing from your country.
Is that Yep.
Yes. Non tariff barriers.
It's a, it's a complic can be complicated.
I mean, they may be based on some legitimate sense
of what's needed, but have unintended negative trade impacts
or they could be, as you described, designed
for protectionist purposes or keep out imports.
One final question. That's right, Mr. Chief. Yeah. Yeah.
How, to
what extent do you think there is a risk
in this particular space?
I mean, I'm interested in the pork space.
Uh, particularly there's been a lot of work done
by animal policy International on that.
Um, all
of the countries from whom we currently import pork also
produce cell store free pork.
So, uh, if we were
to bring a rule like this in on pork products,
we wouldn't stop importing from any
of those countries necessarily.
We would just require 'em to send us the stuff
that met our welfare standards.
It seems to me a vanishingly small probability
that there would be any retaliation around that.
So to what extent do you think that, what,
what is the scale of that risk?
It seems very small to me at least.
Uh, I have to answer that in terms of the petition that,
you know, we were asked to comment on Yes.
Which wasn't specifically about pork. It was about Sure.
Animal products in general,
and that's the way we approached it. Sure. So,
But say it was just about pork, so we began as a test case
with just doing pork
and layer eggs, for example, but nothing else.
Would that be a, a tentative way to test the risk?
Uh, I guess it'd be a tentative way to test the risk.
It's a question of the appetite for taking the
Risk and how much is that risk?
No, that, that's impossible for us.
We, I I can't really give you an idea of that. Yeah.
It's not, it's probably not huge, but nevertheless it is.
It can't be discounted. Thank
You. Alright.
Honor Your point about, um, you say that, um,
civil, the animal welfare considerations need
to be seen in the context of each country's
specific domestic circumstances.
Is that 'cause you think these things
are culturally relative?
Uh, that's probably a question that would be better
directed to the ministry for primary industries than us,
because I think that's getting out of our remit. But
What's the basis for your, your assertion
That is based in your advice?
That's based on advice that we take from the ministry
for primary industries with whom we work very closely on
these issues, that it's not always appropriate to apply,
uh, to other countries.
The kind of standards that we would, uh,
apply in New Zealand, because climate,
there are climatic differences, there are, uh,
differences in, um, you know, transport, uh, links
and, and a variety of factors that are taken into account.
I, I don't have an answer to your question.
Okay. But, but it's one of your main assertions,
you've just taken it on faith from not the
Npi not the cultural aspect.
Sorry, we haven't addressed that.
Right. But, but,
but surely at at least potentially there should be,
um, universal standards
of animal welfare that could be agreed.
Is that not, you don't agree with that?
That is really is a question around our MPI
because it's a technical issue and we, we don't have these,
Is it a technical issue?
Yes, I, well, we believe it would be a technical issue.
Okay. And perhaps I could just add to that, um,
the WTO itself doesn't, um,
place any standards in relation to animal welfare.
It's about how it, um, uh, how it measures trade, how,
uh, countries should, uh, facilitate trade.
So, uh, our expertise is in the trade side,
and that's where NPI would be, um, better placed on, uh,
sort of global recognition of animal welfare standards.
Right. Thank you Laura. Um, thank you Mr.
Chair, and thank you for, um, coming to the committee.
I guess my question probably follows on from Phils a little
bit around, um, what work, if, if it's you
or NPI, um, could you do in the space
that isn't necessarily like an enforcement, you have
to meet our standards?
Is there other ways in which we can work with some of these,
um, countries that we import in
to encourage them to use better standards?
If you get what I mean, as opposed
to it being a forceful mechanism?
And do we do any work with these countries in order
to bring up some of these standards or not? I'm not sure.
Again, that's probably a better question for NPI. Okay.
But, but, um, New Zealand does belong
to the World Organization of animal health.
That NPI represents us that,
and that's where they do discuss with other countries, um,
you know, what, what as the basis, what, um,
measures should be taken in terms of animal welfare
depending on their own specific circumstances. Mm-hmm.
We've also, um, taken, uh, obligation
or, um, uh, agreed obligations with some
of our free trade agreement partners more recently,
including the uk, uh,
to work together on animal welfare standards.
And in that agreement there was recognition
that each country will have
to manage their own standards according to their needs.
Um, but that there was, uh, good reason to work together,
um, and help facilitate global animal welfare standards.
Right, Barbara? Yeah,
so I guess if I'm hearing correctly, we could follow all
of the, uh, legal aspects
and all of the written aspects to the letter
of the law in terms of the pigs either way.
Um, but off then a country decided
that it didn't want our meat or our milk
because we had done that,
there is nothing legally
binding in a trade agreement.
Is that what I'm hearing you say?
Um, so perhaps I can speak to that.
Um, the, the idea of the public mails, um,
that was championed in the case, um, EEC, uh, uh,
SEALS products and, um, mentioned in the petition, uh, that,
uh, appellate body absolutely found that animal welfare
could be a public moral.
So that's why, as you know, you know, we,
we don't dispute that.
Um, however, that is just one part of the test.
And so in order to satisfy WTO rules, in addition
to proving that, that, uh,
that the animal welfare was the legitimate objective, um,
to, to protect New Zealand's public morals,
we would also have to show
that the measure we took was absolutely necessary
and that there was no other, uh, no other measure
that we could have taken to achieve the same objective
that was less trade restrictive.
Um, incidentally, uh, that particular case, uh,
fell down, uh, on that particular issue
because it was ultimately seen as discriminatory.
So yes, there are legal, um, ways that,
uh, a animal welfare consideration could be argued, um,
as complying, um, or as justified by a public moral,
but it's actually quite a difficult
and technical test to meet.
So there's the, the trade policy risks,
but there's also the trade law risks.
Even if you could, there's no guarantee
that the retaliation couldn't happen.
That's what I'm hearing you correctly saying,
like the risk is they can do what they like regardless
of what's well within reason, regardless of what's written.
Well, they could, and if,
and it wouldn't necessarily take the form
of a direct response either to our measure,
but then the, the, the, um, avenue open to us, we would have
to contest it under whatever trade law provision there might
be, um, that we could use whether or not we would prevail.
It's not clear. Okay. Un willful.
So I totally accept the, um, the advice about the risks
of non tariff barriers
and the sort of pragmatic assessment of risks.
So that's accepted.
I guess I'm interested in the extent to which, um,
the ministry sees this as an issue that New Zealand has
to be, uh, responding to.
I mean, if you think about New Zealand consumers are
definitely moving on this,
and it's an ethical consideration that is challenged
by the idea of, um, uh, you know, we ban south crates,
but we import all of this, uh, product that does from, from,
uh, sources that don't.
Um, some of our most important markets like the EU
and the UK probably ahead of us on this.
Um, uh,
and yet I don't, I don't get any sense from your advice
that there's any kind of proactive strategy
to position New Zealand on, on this issue,
particularly given, you know, so much
of our long term interest lies
and selling, you know, um, sustainably produced high quality
product into discerning affluent consumer markets.
What, why isn't it more of a thing for you all? All
Of what you say hyper is absolutely true.
I guess from the point of view
of MFA's role in providing advice on this,
our focus is on exports
and we, um, proceed on the basis
that New Zealand already has a really good reputation
for producing sustainable high quality food
and having very good animal welfare standards.
So we haven't really, we don't really address the issue
that you are talking about so much
because we rest on New Zealand's reputation.
It's a great issue. Quick stop on that.
Look, we're outta time, unfortunately. So
Got one minute, we got one minute wrap
up there. A real quick one,
We're over time already. We need,
We've Got Minute,
it's a 15 minute slot
and we've already had 17, so that's 21st.
Alright. Thank you very much for coming in.
Appreciate your time Caroline.